Slide 1
HYGIENE, SANITATION & SAFETY
Dr. E Mwaniki

Slide 2
DEFINITIONS
Hygiene
Hygiene refers to the set of practices associated with the preservation of health and healthy living.
Hygiene is a concept related to medicine, as well as to personal and professional care practices related to most aspects of living, although it is most often associated with cleanliness and preventive measures.
Hygiene is also the name of the science that deals with the promotion and preservation of health, also called Hygienics.

Slide 3
Other definitions:
I. Refers to acts that can lead to good health and cleanliness, such as frequent hand washing, face washing, and bathing with soap and clean water
II. Conditions or practices conducive to maintaining health and preventing disease, especially through cleanliness: good standards of both food and personal hygiene as well as environmental hygiene.
NB- Practicing personal hygiene in many parts of the world can be difficult due to lack of clean water and soap.

Slide 4
Definition contd'
Sanitation- is a hygienic means of promoting health through prevention of human contact with the hazards of wastes.
Wastes that can cause health problems are human and animal faeces solid wastes, domestic wastewater (sewage grey water) industrial waste and agricultural wastes.
Hygienic means of prevention can be by using engineering solutions (e.g. sewerage and wastewater treatment) simple technologies (e.g. latrines septic tanks) or even by personal hygienic practices (e.g. simple hand washing with soap.)

Slide 5
Sanitation definition Contd
It is also group of methods to collect human excreta and urine as well as community waste water in hygienic way, where human and community health is not altered, (WHO).
Sanitation methods aim to decrease spreading of diseases by adequate water, excreta and other waste treatment, proper handling of water, food and by restricting the occurrence and causes of diseases.

Slide 6
Types of Sanitation
Basic Sanitation – The management of Human faeces at the household level
On-site Sanitation – Collection and treatment of waste is done where it is deposited e.g pit latrines, septic tanks.
Food Sanitation – Measures for ensuring food safety.
Environmental Sanitation – Control of environmental factors that form links in disease transmission e.g. solid wastes water and waste water, industrial waste, noise, various other types of pollution.

Slide 7
Types of Sanitation
Ecological Sanitation – A move that tries to imitate nature through recycling of nutrients and water from human and animal wastes in a hygienically safe manner.

Slide 8
Epidemiology:
The frequency and distribution of diseases and the factors that contributes (determinants or risk factors) to the spread of diseases.
The factors include:

Virulence of the pathogen.
Susceptibility of the population.
Mode of transmission.


Slide 9
There are four epidemiological terms used to describe pattern of diseases distribution in the population:
Endemic, Epidemic, Pandemic and Sporadic.
Of the four, epidemics causes serious damage to population in cases where hygiene is not observed.
EPIDEMIC: refers to more than the normal number of cases of a disease in a community or an area within a particular period.
It involves diseases with short incubation period and mode of transmission is not complicated in that it can be distributed easily, e.g. through contaminated drinking water

Slide 10
A PANDEMIC: refers to an epidemic that has spread over several countries or continents, usually affecting a large number of people. e.g HIV/Aids
ENDEMIC: Endemic refers to the constant presence and/or usual prevalence of a disease or infectious agent in a population within a geographic area
SPORADIC: refers to a disease that occurs infrequently and irregularly

Slide 11
Transmission of diseases
Transmission/spread
The process of the pathogen (disease causing organism) leaving one host and infecting a new host.
For transmission to be complete two factors are crucial:

Source of disease
Target population


Slide 12
Diseases causing agents
The following are the major disease causing agents:

Bacteria
Parasites
Viruses
Fungi
Chlamydia
Rickettsia


Slide 13
Modes of disease transmission

Ingestion (through the oral route)
Penetration (due to bleach of the skin or mucosal linings)
Inhalation (through respiratory route)
Conjunctiva (through the eye)
Urinogenital
Vector borne (aided by vectors)


Slide 14
Ingestion
In communities where facilities for safe disposal of faeces are inadequate, the major part of the diarrhea diseases burden originates from infected faeces.
Infectious agents are transmitted from faeces to hands to mouth (which can occur directly or indirectly via other surfaces e.g. toilet surfaces), or by consumption of food or water which has become contaminated with faecal organisms.

Slide 15
Food and waterborne Disease
What is Food and waterborne Disease?
Food and waterborne Disease is caused by eating contaminated food or impure water.
There are more than 250 kinds of food and waterborne diseases.
Most of these diseases are infections and are caused by bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
Other food and waterborne diseases are caused by toxic chemicals and other harmful substances.

Slide 16
Food and water borne diseases have a number of different symptoms.
However, because the microbe or toxin usually enters the body through the gastrointestinal tract, the first symptoms of disease are commonly nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea

Slide 17
Inhalation
Respiratory tract infections such as colds and flu, result either from inhalation of infected mucous droplets,
or by rubbing the nasal mucosa or the eye with mucous contaminated hands.
Data now shows that good respiratory hygiene (safe disposal of nasal mucous and hand washing) can reduce the risk of respiratory infections.

Slide 18
Transmission of diseases
For intestinal helminths, the hands, along with human faeces, are the major route for spreading a variety of intestinal helminths, which, while they do not necessarily contribute to mortality do contribute significantly to morbidity in children under 15 years of age
(e.g of helminths: Ascaris and hookworm)

Slide 19
Transmission of diseases
(Slide contains image/diagram — no additional text)

Slide 20
Others
For skin and eye infections, the hands are probably the major route of the spread of infection.
Vectors such as flies also transmit the disease causing organisms.
Trachoma is largely preventable through hygiene (face washing breaks the infection cycle).

Slide 21
Transmission of diseases
Waterborne diseases are caused by pathogenic microbes that can be directly spread through contaminated water.
Most waterborne diseases cause diarrhea illness.
[Note not all diseases listed below cause diarrhea].
Eighty-eight percent of diarrhea causes worldwide are linked to unsafe water, inadequate sanitation or insufficient hygiene.

Slide 22
Cont..
These cases result in 15 million deaths each year, mostly in youth children. The usual cause of death is dehydration.
Most cases of diarrhea illness and death occur in developing countries because of unsafe water, poor sanitation and insufficient hygiene.
Other waterborne disease do not cause diarrhea, instead these disease can cause malnutrition, skin infections and organ damage.

Slide 23
Diseases related to poor hygiene

Amebiasis
Campylobacter
Cholera
Cryptosporidiosis
Cyclosporiasis
Dracunculiasis (guinea-worm disease)
Escherichia coli
Fascioliasis
Giardiasis
Hepatitis
Leptospirosis
Rotavirus
Salmonella
Schistosomiasis
Shigellosis
Typhoid Fever


Slide 24
Prevention and control of diseases
This needs understanding of how infectious diseases are transmitted, and prioritizing practices which carry the greatest risk.
Breaking the chain of faecal-oral transmission is achieved by a combination of improved sanitation and good hygiene practices.

Slide 25
Medical hygiene practices
Include:

Insolation or quarantine of infectious persons or materials to prevent spread of infection.
Sterilization of instruments used in surgical procedures.
Use of protective clothing and barriers, such as mask, gowns, caps, eyewear and gloves.
Proper bandaging and dressing of injuries.
Safe disposal of medical waste.
Disinfection of reusable (i.e. linen, pads, uniforms)
Scrubbing up, hand-washing, especially in an operating room, but in more general health-care settings as well, where diseases can be transmitted


Slide 26
Respiratory hygiene
Correct respiratory and hand hygiene when coughing and sneezing reduces the spread of germs particularly during the cold and flu season.

Carry tissues and use them to catch coughs and sneezes
Disposal of tissues as soon as possible
Clean your hands by hand washing or using an alcohol hand sanitizer


Slide 27
Food hygiene at home
Food hygiene is concerned with the hygiene practices that prevent food poisoning.
The five key principles of food hygiene according to WHO are:

Prevent contaminating food with pathogen spreading from people, pets and pests.
Separate raw and cooked foods to prevent contaminating the cooked foods.
Cook foods for the appropriate length of time and at the appropriate temperature to kill pathogens.
Store foods at the proper temperature.
Use safe and raw materials.


Slide 28
Household water treatment and safe storage
Household water treatment and safe storage ensure drinking water is safe for consumption.
Drinking water quality remains a significant problem not only in developing countries
but also in developed countries even in the European region it is estimated that 120 million people do not have access to safe drinking water.

Slide 29
Point-of-use water quality interventions can reduce diarrhea disease in communities where water quality is poor or in emergency situations where there is a breakdown in water supply.
Since water can become contaminated during storage at home (e.g. by contact with contaminated hands or using dirty storage vessels).
Safe storage of water in the home is also important.

Slide 30
Cont…
Methods for treatment of drinking water, include:

Chemical disinfection using chlorine or iodine.
Boiling
Filtration using ceramics filters
Solar disinfection — solar disinfection is an effective method, especially when no chemical disinfectants are available.
UV irradiation — community or household UV systems may be batch or flow-through. The lamps can be suspended above the water channel or submerged in the water flow.


Slide 31
Cont…

Combined flocculation/disinfection systems — available as sachets of powder that act by coagulating and flocculating sediments in water followed by release of chlorine
Multibarrier methods — some systems use two or more of the above treatments in combination or in succession to optimize efficacy


Slide 32
Hand washing
Simple hygiene measures like hand washing with soap should be emphasized:

Before preparing food
Before eating
Before feeding a child, after defecation
After cleaning a child who has defecated and
After disposing of a child's stool should be promoted

All families should have a clean and functioning latrine

Slide 33
Personal hygiene/Clean body
This is also known as personal hygiene which include:

Always keeping your body clean by taking a bath
Change your under wear and socks
Change clothes after bathing
Keep dry
Brush your teeth at least twice daily
Keeping finger nail short
Shaving
For women use of sanitary pads

NB: look good and you will feel good

Slide 34
Vector control
Measures should be taken to get rid of vectors which poses danger of disease transmission:

Destroying their breeding sites
Biological predators
Chemical sprays
Mechanical killing
Personal and general hygiene


Slide 35
Sewage treatment
Is the process of removing contaminants from wastewater and household sewage both runoff (effluents) and domestic.
Includes physical, chemical and biological contaminants.
Its objective is to produce an environmentally safe fluid waste stream (or treated effluent) and a solid waste (or treated sludge) suitable for disposal or reuse (usually as farm fertilizer).
Using advanced technology it is now possible to re-use sewage effluent for drinking water.

Slide 36
Cont…
In areas where there is no public sewer the following sanitation methods can be adopted:

Septic tank
Pour flush latrine
Ventilated improved pit (VIP)

The following methods should be discouraged:

Service or bucket latrines
Public latrines
Open latrines
Excretion to the environment


Slide 37
Health Education
Health education activities to be carried out for convincing and helping community members to adopt and maintain certain preventive practices such as breast feeding, improved weaning, clean drinking water use of plenty water for hygiene, use of latrine sanitary disposal of excreta

Slide 38
Improving hygiene and Sanitation

Improving the efficiency, sustainability and integration of hygiene and sanitation interventions into communities and institutions such as schools.
Community hygiene
Sustainability research
Improving environment health practice in communities
Restoring safe water and sanitation


Slide 39
Summary
In reality, all of the following contribute in some measure to reducing the burden of infectious diseases circulating in the community:

Hand hygiene and personal hygiene
Food hygiene (cooking, storing, preventing cross contamination)
Control of vectors like house flies


Slide 40
Cont…

Ensuring safe water at point of use
Respiratory hygiene
Safe disposal of faeces (both human and animal)
General hygiene (laundry, surfaces, toilets, baths, sinks)
Disposal of solid waste, control of wastewater and rainwater
Health education


Slide 41
HYGIENE
Hygiene refers to the set of practices associated with the preservation of health and healthy living.
Hygiene is a concept related to medicine, as well as to personal and professional care practices related to most aspects of living, although it is most often associated with cleanliness and preventive measures.
Hygiene is also the name of the science that deals with the promotion and preservation of health, also called hygienics.

Slide 42
Sanitation is the hygienic means of promoting health through prevention of human contact with the hazard wastes.
Wastes that can cause health problems are human and animal faeces, solid wastes, domestic waste water (sewage, grey water), industrial wastes and agricultural wastes.
Hygienic means of prevention can be by using:

Engineering solutions (e.g sewerage and waste water treatment),
Simple technologies (e.g. latrines, septic tanks), or even by
Personal hygiene practices (e.g simple hand washing with soap)


Slide 43
INFECTIONS
An infection is the detrimental colonization of a host organism by a foreign species.
In an infection, the infecting organism seeks to utilize the host's resources to multiply, usually at the expense of the host.
REASONS FOR PERSONAL HYGIENE
To improve health.
Good personal hygiene can make you a healthy person.
Regular bathing and frequent hand washing will prevent many illnesses by killing the unseen germs found on our bodies.

Slide 44
To prevent body odour.
Bathing every day and using a good antiperspirant or deodorant will remove the body chemicals that cause odour.
To improve self esteem.
Go about your day in confidence.
Good personal hygiene also improves self esteem and confidence.
If you know you are clean, you can go about your daily activities without worrying that the body odours may be offending others.

Slide 45
To improve skin problems.
Good personal hygiene may prevent athlete's foot and other conditions that are caused by lack of washing.
Unwashed skin can result in skin diseases like scabies, eczema and ring worm.
To prevent Dental problems.
Brush your teeth 2-3 times a day.
Good personal hygiene will prevent bad breath and tooth decay.
Brushing and flossing your teeth three times a day will keep your breath smelling clean.

Slide 46
HOW TO PRACTICE GOOD PERSONAL HYGIENE

Wash your hands after coming into contact with germs, which can be found almost every where.
When you are preparing uncooked meat or have gone to the toilet, or done anything that brings your body into contact with germs, it's important to wash your hands.
E. coli, Hepatitis, flu, colds and other infectious diseases are transmitted if you bring contaminated hands into contact with someone's face or body.
GERMS are living micro organisms that can cause disease.
It is recommended that you use an antibacterial soap when washing hands to ensure that you kill all the germs that could be present on hands and for arms.


Slide 47
Why is hand washing important?
To protect oneself from getting infected by a number of dangerous ailments.
People who are careless about washing hands are at higher risk of contracting a cold or flu.
Not washing hands has also the ability to cause gastrointestinal illnesses and also diarrhea which can spread to the whole family.
Improper or not washing hands can cause pneumonia in elderly people and in people who are diagnosed with chronic diseases.
Not washing hands can affect the health of the entire family, learning the proper way to hand wash is therefore essential to stay healthy.

Slide 48
Some illnesses we can get when other people's dirty hands touch the food we eat.
So it is important to keep hands as clean as possible, particularly when around food.
Hand washing techniques:

Hand washing with wipes
Soap and water
Hand antiseptic sanitiser
Drying


Slide 49
Hand washing
When should we wash our hands?

Before touching the eyes, nose and mouth
Before eating or handling food
After using the toilet
When hands are contaminated by respiratory secretions e.g. after coughing or sneezing
After changing diapers or handling soiled articles when looking after young children or the sick


Slide 50
Washing Hands
Use clean water and antiseptic soap over your hands and wrist.
To wash hands long enough, sing a song to wash and wash and wash the hands, in order to get rid of the germs away.
Use something clean to dry the hands, such as a paper towel or hot air drier.
Basic hand washing and skin care can prevent work exposures and diseases.
Good washing and scrubbing with water and soap helps remove germs, contaminants, and chemicals.
It can prevent exposures by ingestion and cross contamination of the surfaces and objects that we touch.

Slide 51
People should periodically wash their hands during the day.
In some occupations, regular hand washing is required by law.
Hand washing is important before after using the rest room and before or after certain activities.
People should wash their hands before, during and after preparing food and before they take breaks at work to eat or drink.
To control the spread of germs that cause the flu or common cold, people should wash their hands whenever they cough, sneeze, or blow their noses, and whenever they are around someone who is sick.

Slide 52
Hand washing involves more than a quick rinse under a faucet/tap.
To wash hands properly, people should first wet them under the faucet and then use liquid or bar soap.
Hands should be held out of the water until all skin surfaces are scrubbed and lathered for at least twenty seconds.
Then rinse with clean water and dry the hands with disposable towel.
To wash hands with a hand sanitizer one should apply the appropriate amount of sanitizer into the palm of the hand, and then rub hands together until they are dry, being careful to cover all surfaces of the hands.
For some job activities, hand sanitizers are not an acceptable means of hand cleaning.
Showering and face-washing after work is also a good idea. Proper personal hygiene and hand protection can help keep people productive and on the job.

Slide 53
Steps for good hand washing

Wet hands under running water
Apply soap and rub hands together to make a soapy lather
Away from the running water, rub the palms, back of hands, between fingers, back of fingers, thumbs, finger tips and wrists, do this for at least 20 seconds
Rinse hands thoroughly under running water
Dry hands thoroughly with clean cotton towel
Washing hands with water alone is not enough! Soap and rubbing helps remove germs.
Ash or other cleaning materials can replace soap, if soap is not available


Slide 54
In areas where water is scarce it is still possible to practice washing hands with soap using tippy taps — plastic bottles with holes in the cap and string attached to the top and bottom that can hang over a piece of wood or a nail and be tipped to pour water over hands and tipped back to stop the flow.

Space in between the nail and finger can be good hiding places for germs which spread infections
Fingernails must be clipped regularly to keep them short


Slide 55
2. Brush your teeth 2-3 times a day
Brushing your teeth as recommended results in a good personal appearance and oral health.
If you don't brush as recommended, you can face an array of dental problems including tooth decay, gingivitis bad breath and so on.
The bacteria that form in your mouth between brushing or overnight causes these dental problems.
You are advised to brush your teeth and rinse with antiseptic mouth wash each day at least 2-3 times per day to fight off these bacterium.
Brush in a circular fashion ensuring that food particles stuck between the teeth and in the crevices of the molars are removed effectively.

Slide 56
Causes of bad breath

Food trapped in cavities after eating
The food we eat (Garlic and onions)
Tobacco and beer
Plaque deposits
Gum disease


Slide 57
How to maintain fresh breath all day

Brush your teeth at least three times a day especially after eating and before going to sleep.
Use toothpaste with green tea extract because the properties in green tea will help prevent bacterial enzyme from turning sugar into a sticky substance that allows plaque to stick to the teeth.
Floss to remove food that gets stuck in between your teeth and decay. No matter how much you brush, you will not remove everything.
Gargle or rinse with water when it is inconvenient to brush after meals or use mouth wash.
Clean your tongue. Bacteria accumulate on the tongue and contribute to the foul smell when you breathe or open your mouth.


Slide 58

Chew sugarless gum or suck sugarless mint to stimulate saliva production from dry mouth.
Avoid tobacco and beer.
Avoid strong odours of food like garlic and onions.
Visit the dentist regularly.

How to detect you have bad breath:

Breathe out using the mouth into a handkerchief
Ask someone who will tell you the truth
Run a floss between the teeth


Slide 59
3. Bathe daily
Taking a bath is key to more than just your overall hygiene but also results in ridding your body of bacteria.
Not bathing can lead to an over accumulation of bacteria that can cause odour and certain types of infection, primarily in women.
Bathe at least twice a day with an antibacterial soap.

Important to wash off after games, exercise and work

Some antibacterial soap can cause allergic reaction.

Slide 60

A good and thorough bath one or twice daily is important to maintain healthy skin and to prevent infections of the skin.
Use soap and water
Dry with clean towel
Change into clean underwear after bath


Slide 61
Causes of bad body odour

Chemicals in sweat including pheromones which are made by the body and sexually attract (or repel) other people
Wastes excreted through the skin e.g metabolized alcohol
The action of bacteria that live on the skin and feed on dead skin cells and sweat
Unwashed clothes e.g underwear and socks


Slide 62
Maintaining good body odour

Clean your under arm and groin and dry thoroughly
Use deodorants or antiperspirants
Wash the clothes after using them once
Wash, shower or bathe regularly
Cut pungent food that is carried in sweat from your diet. Garlic, onions and beer are the common ones.


Slide 63
How to prevent foot odour
Foot odour is caused when sweat does not evaporate and bacteria feed on it.

Wash the soles of your feet and in between your toes with water and antibacterial soap regularly
Soap your feet in kosher salt solution
Use antiperspirant or foot deodorant
Use clean and comfortable socks. Change daily


Slide 64

Air your shoes.
Choose right shoe size.
Wash and air them.
Sprinkle your shoes with talcum powder.
Switch to wearing open toed sandals.
Wear thongs in public bathrooms/showers.
While going out slippers/footwear should be worn to protect the skin of the feet from coming into contact with parasites like hookworm.


Slide 65
4. Wash your hair regularly.
If you don't wash hair regularly you could develop dandruff problems and lice.
Hair which is not washed and combed regularly, becomes infested with lice, which suck blood from the scalp.
Lice are easily transferred from one person to another.
Ridding yourself of lice can be difficult.
Buy a shampoo that fights dandruff and moisturizes and improves the quality of your hair.
If you have a problem with dry scalp, consult with a dermatologist about the possibility of getting a prescription shampoo.

Slide 66
Hair care

Wash your hair regularly. You need to wash after spending long hours outdoors.
This is because hair collects dust and pollens. You need to wash away the chlorine after swimming.
Shampooing helps get rid of dandruff that is caused by dead skin cells.
Take a shower after exercises which makes you perspire/sweat.


Slide 67
5. Don't share personal items.
Don't use anything that has come into contact with another person's body fluids.
This is very important step in practicing good hygiene.
Don't use or touch syringes or any other type of medical or personal item that has come into contact with a person's fluids.
This could put you into a very high risk of contracting a very serious illness or condition.
If when you know someone refrain from personal items.

Hand or handkerchief should be used to cover the mouth while sneezing or coughing


Slide 68
Water hygiene and sanitation (WASH)
Sustainable Development Goal 6 goes beyond drinking water, sanitation and hygiene to also address the quality and sustainability of water resources, which are critical to the survival of people and the planet. The 2030 Agenda recognizes the centrality of water resources to sustainable development and the vital role that improved drinking water, sanitation and hygiene play in progress in other areas, including health, education and poverty reduction.

Slide 69
Definitions
Safe water
Safe water is clean water that can be consumed or used without risk of getting a disease.
Sanitation
Sanitation is the state of being clean. It generally refers to the facilities and services involved in the safe disposal of human waste. i.e Toilets. Latrines.
Hygiene
Hygiene is the practice of keeping yourself and the things around you clean (free of germs) in order to prevent disease. It refers to a range of practices, including personal hygiene and professional care, which reduce the incidence of disease.

Slide 70
Good hygiene practices
Drinking safe water
Why is it important?
Water from open sources like streams, river canal/channel etc. is unsafe for drinking, as it is prone to contamination by animals' germs and human beings.
Drinking contaminated water causes diseases such as diarrhoea, dysentery, typhoid, cholera and hepatitis.
Even if water is collected from a safe source, it can get contaminated if it is not handled properly while collecting, storing and using.

Slide 71
How should drinking water be collected, handled and stored?

Drinking water should be collected from a safe source such as a tap and protected springs only.
The inside of a vessel should be cleaned well before collecting water.
After filling the vessel with drinking water, it should be covered while being carried from water source to the place where it is used.
Treating water at the point of use is an effective way of making it safe to drink. Treatment methods includes: point of use treatment using chlorine (chlorination) solution.


Slide 72

SODIS (solar disinfection) fill clean 1.5-2 litre plastic (PET) bottles with clear water, place on an inclined surface (roof) in the sun for 6 hours (48 hours if cloudy) water will be safe to drink.
Filtering using special ceramic filters.
Boiling: heating water until a rolling boiling begins. After cooling off, it is safe to drink if it has been kept covered.
To remain safe, water must be stored in clean containers with narrow necks or covered with hard covers or jerry cans or other closed containers with spigots.
To keep treated water safe, hands and other objects should not be put into drinking water containers. A ladle or cup attached to the storage container or hung on the wall with a nail and only used for the purpose of serving the water should be used.


Slide 73
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
Environmental health is defined by the World Health Organisation as those aspects of the human health and disease that are determined by factors in the environment. It also refers to the theory and practice of assessing and controlling factors in the environment that can potentially affect health.
Handling of household refuse
Waste disposal is a growing problem worldwide. Although there have been recent advancements in waste disposal, it remains an overall public safety and environmental health issue that countries around the world continue to address.

Slide 74
Types of waste and its disposal
Organic
Derived from animal and plants foods which includes:

Vegetable and meat trimmings.
Bones.
Inedible plant parts.
Food leftovers.
Old cooking oils.
From flower beds and hedges.


Slide 75
Inorganic (solid waste) which include:

Packaging materials, cans both plastic and metals.
Glass which include crockery.
Glass bottles mostly from the bar and kitchen.
Offices wastes which include papers cardboard cartridges.


Slide 76

Garage wastes which include old engine oils.
Linen wastes, towels and rags.

Liquid wastes

This include grey water from the kitchen and cooking oils.


Slide 77
PREVENTION AND REDUCTION
The best method of managing waste is prevention and reduction, which can be achieved in a number of ways like recycling and making use of second hand items.
Burying
It is suitable for organic wastes which cannot (degrade) once in the soil thus add nutrients to the soils.
It is not suitable for solid wastes.
It is not suitable where large amounts of wastes are produced.
It is ideal for picnic where small amount of wastes is produced.

Slide 78
Storage of hazardous materials

Keep all flammable products out of direct sunlight and away from heat, sparks or flames.
Store all containers in an upright position a cardboard box instead of plastic bags and place leaking containers in a larger plastic container with a tight-fitting lid.
All hazardous waste generated by business needs to be stored in a safe and secure location.
Waste identified as high or extremely risky should not be stored with the rest of hazardous waste. This kind of waste needs to be picked up by special arrangement, possibly outside of the regular hazardous waste pickup.


Slide 79
Burning/Incineration
Incineration is popular due to the minimal land available for disposal but there is some concern about the release of micro pollutants like dioxins from incinerator stacks.

Mainly used inflammable waste like paper.
Suitable for small amounts of waste as this method may pollute the air.

Draining into main sewer

Suitable for disposing liquid wastes like grey water from dishwashing.
Water from the kitchen is normally channelled to the main sewer.


Slide 80
Recycling/energy recovery
Energy recovery is a promising form of waste disposal. It works by recycling some forms of waste into a fuel source for heating, cooking and powering turbines.

This is one of the best way of disposing wastes.
Materials are separated and taken for recycling.

Waste that can be recycled include:

Glass.
Metals.
Plastic cans heavy duty plastic sheets and paper.
Rubber.
Paper (made from wood).
Cooking oil into biodiesel.


Slide 81
Compositing/biological reprocessing
Biological reprocessing methods such as composting can be used for organic waste like food, paper and plant material.

Organic matter is composed to produce organic manure to grow organic foods and for adding nutrients to flower beds.

Feeding animals
Left over foods are used to feed pigs, cows, dogs and other domestic animals.

Slide 82
Compactors

Compacting reduces the waste sizes (bulkiness)
The compacted wastes are then discarded into dumping sites.

Disposal into sea/rivers/Ocean Dumping
Controversy surrounds ocean dumping as a waste disposal method. Although the waste may provide nutrients from some sea life, it's widely believed that the harmful effects will outweigh any benefits.

This is a bad method of waste disposal because it pollutes the river environments.
However, water from sewage lagoons is usually safe to dispose into the rivers once they are certified clean.

